---
title: Syllabus
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "Syllabus Contents"
---

## Purpose and Objectives

In CS 3800 you will learn to understand formal treatments of the
notions of computation, computability, computational power, and
efficiency. You will learn to understand both intuitively and formally
simple models of computation. You will gain expertise with
mathematical proofs and common proof techniques, and you will also
come to understand the connections between these theoretical models 
and computational tasks in common programming languages. 

After this course you will know how to:

  1. 
  2. 

After this course you will 

## Contact

The best way to get in contact for personal, private (FERPA, etc)
messages is via my email address
[jhemann@northeastern.edu](mailto:jhemann@northeastern.edu). You
should expect a response within 48 hours. You will find that I am
faster with [Piazza]({{ site.baseurl }}/tech/) or our public forums. If I deem it even
potentially useful to others, I will likely anonymize your letter,
re-post it on Piazza, answer it there, and forward you the link.

A great regular way to reach out for help is via our [office
hours]({{ site.baseurl }}/office-hours/).

If in fact you're interested in PL research, logic, logic program,
automated theorem proving or the like, please let me know on that too!
[I'm excited to talk more about it all
:-)](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=SePR8OkAAAAJ)

## Required Texts 

We will use the 3rd Edition of Sipser's [Introduction to the Theory of
Computation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Introduction_to_the_Theory_of_Computation)
text for this class. There are courses where you do not need the
putatively required textbook. In this course, the text is really,
actually necessary both to complete the required readings and also
portions of the homework assignments. This textbook is widely
available, including at the [Northeastern University
bookstore](https://northeastern.bncollege.com/shop/northeastern/home).
As you read, please also take care to pay attention for the author's
[known errata](http://www-math.mit.edu/~sipser/itoc-errs3.1.html). You
can find *an* edition of this text [available as an E-book from the
Snell
library](https://onesearch.library.northeastern.edu/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=NEU_ALMA21174526980001401&context=L&vid=NU&lang=en_US&search_scope=default_scope&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engine&tab=default_tab&query=any,contains,Introduction%20to%20the%20theory%20of%20computation).


## Grade Breakdown

I will assign overall course grades as follows:

     | Category                  | Weight (%) |
     |---------------------------+------------|
     | Lecture Quizzes           |         20 |
     | Exams                     |         35 |
     | Homework*                 |         45 |
     | TRACE                     |          1 | 
     | Total                     |        101 |

I will calculate overall numeric grade according to this grading
scheme. Everyone who gets at least 90% will get some form of A,
everyone with at least 80% will get at least some form of B, and
everyone with at least 70% will get at least some form of
C. Additionally, there will be a "curve", but I will determine it only
at the end of the semester. This curve will potentially raise grades
above those described here, but will not lower them. Therefore, the
total grade shown on Canvas does not necessarily reflects the
worst-case scenario of the letter grade you will get at the end of the
semester. This means I *cannot* give you a more precise estimate of
your grade than what you calculate from the raw score. I detail below
the aforementioned individual components of your final grade.

I will base some portions of your homework and lecture quiz
grades on completion and submission of the relevant exercises. I will
base the remaining portion of each on correctness. 

### Total Running Grade Calculation

We will track the completion portions of your lab and homework grades,
as well as your project grades, on
[Canvas](https://canvas.northeastern.edu/). You will have an
approximate assessment of your *current* grade status before the
Add/Drop deadline. We cannot give you a standing completion percentage
of the participation component of your grade because, logically, there
[are no pop
quizzes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unexpected_hanging_paradox).


### Collaborative Course Construction and Feedback

I *want* you all's feedback and input. I am open to suggestions and
changes; I consider this preliminary until the end of the first week
of class. You can see any and all changes on the course website's
repository. I cannot promise that we will act on all suggestions, and
even those we find compelling may not be implementable as we go.

## Participation

I expect you to attend each lecture. Your attendance is a prerequisite
for a substantial portion of the course's grade. I expect students to
attend every class and remain in class throughout the duration of the
session. Your absence or tardiness will impact your ability to achieve
course objectives which could hurt your course grade. An absence,
excused or unexcused, does not relieve a student of any course
requirement. Lecture content quizzes serve as proxies for
participation and thus attendance, as well as to gauge students'
understanding.

### Lecture Quizzes/Polls

Expect to have regular content quizzes during or toward the end of
lecture. These act as a forcing function, encouraging attention to
lectures and/or the ancillary readings and to alert me to students'
difficulties.

## Homework

Homework, consisting of weekly programming assignments, is an
essential part of the course. Assignments are available by at least
Thursday evening, and unless otherwise indicated, homework submissions
are due by 10 p.m. on the Wednesday after I have assigned them. We
give a few (randomly varying) extra minutes to account for network
time disagreements, but beyond this homework assignments are due
strictly on the day and time listed on the assignment.

To universally, uniformly and preemptively account for any number of
situations that arise, *I will drop every student's lowest homework
assignment grade.* You will also have an opportunity for a bonus
assignment to replace your lowest remaining assignment. This
absolution for one assignment and optional bonus *is* our late/etc
homework clemency. I shan't accept late submissions except under the
most exceptional of circumstances (family emergencies,
hospitalizations, the like)---if that comes up please see me. We are,
however happy to go over these missed submissions with you at office
hours.

You should make every effort to complete and submit each assignment.
If you are struggling with an assignment, it best to turn in what you
can complete and to seek help. Homework assignments will build on one
another conceptually, and some later assignments require the
successful completion of problems from earlier ones. **Do not fall
behind.** If you feel yourself falling behind, seek help immediately
and take advantage of office hours, your classmates, ancillary
readings, and additional support. Follow both the general homework
guidelines, as well as any special instructions given on the
assignment itself.

We allow an unlimited number of submissions per assignment, up to the
deadline.

We will evaluate your work both for correctness using an automated
test suite and also by manual hand inspection. We provide you an
autograder test suite for each assignment. This autograder merely
ensures that your programs compute the correct answers. 

### Exams 

You will have two long-form exams. I have yet to determine our exams'
format.


### TRACE evaluations

I encourage students to take time and submit TRACE evaluations. Your
time is busy at the end of the term when these are available. In order
to fairly compensate you for that time without violating the integrity
or anonymity of the TRACE system, if 85% or more of the enrolled
students complete these TRACE evaluations, then I shall add a point
onto the class-wide final average.


## Participation

I expect you to attend each lecture. Your attendance is a prerequisite
for a substantial portion of the course's grade. I expect students to
attend every class and remain in class throughout the duration of the
session. Your absence or tardiness will impact your ability to achieve
course objectives which could hurt your course grade. An absence,
excused or unexcused, does not relieve a student of any course
requirement. Lecture content quizzes serve as proxies for
participation and thus attendance, as well as to gauge students'
understanding.

### Oral Explanation and Participation

Proof has a [social
component](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3482651). As such, part of
your grade will also include your participating by communicating with
your colleagues in both lecture and lab sections. These can take the
form of small group "breakout room" work, open class votes and
discussions, or walk us all through some of your answers. 

## Participation

I expect you to attend lecture and lab each class period. Your
attendance is a prerequisite for a substantial portion of the course's
grade, both in your lecture and lab sections. We will [not take
attendance](https://vm.tiktok.com/ZMJBoQovg/) as such, but attendance
is a prerequisite for participation. We will have reading content
quizzes and elicit oral or group explanations as proxies for
participation. 

### Content Quiz, Pre-reading

Before class, I will expect you to have read the notes as marked on
the schedule. These act as a forcing function for the lecture notes
and alert me to students' difficulties. Sometimes we take these for
completion, others for accuracy. These lecture quizzes belongs under
your participation grade.

### Lecture Quizzes/Polls

Expect to have regular content quizzes during or toward the end of
lecture. These act as a forcing function, encouraging attention to
lectures and/or the ancillary readings and to alert me to students'
difficulties.

#### Recording 

I do not permit electronic video and/or audio recording of class in
either modality. Unless the student obtains permission from the
instructor electronic video and/or audio recording of class is
prohibited. If permission is granted, any distribution of the
recording is prohibited. Students with specific electronic recording
accommodations authorized by the [DRC](academic-accommodations) do not
require instructor permission; however, the instructor must be
notified of any such accommodation prior to recording. Any
distribution of such recordings is prohibited. Obviously I cannot
[stop you](https://obsproject.com/), but it's to both our benefits.


## TRACE evaluations

I encourage students to take time and submit TRACE evaluations. Your
time is busy at the end of the term when these are available. In order
to fairly compensate you for that time, if 85% or more of the students
enrolled in a section complete these TRACE evaluations, then I shall
add two points onto the class-wide final average.

## Academic Integrity Policy

Students of course play an integral part in ensuring they receive the
full benefit of their coursework. The students of 2800 are certainly
beholden to the academic integrity policies of [Northeastern
University](http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academic-integrity-policy/)
and as laid out in the [student
handbook](https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/sites.northeastern.edu/dist/8/569/files/2020/09/2021-22-UG-Student-Handbook.pdf),
the [Khoury
College](https://www.khoury.northeastern.edu/information-for-overview/current-undergrad/undergraduate-advising-academic-support/academic-policies/).

### Teamwork and Collaboration

I had originally stipulated that groups of at least 2 from within the
same lab section. *Gradescope cannot enforce either, so I will not
require them.* You can work with up to 3 others, for a total of 4
people in a group. You aren't required to work with anyone else if you
don't wish. You can work with students from any other sections you
wish. You will submit a single submission for your entire group, and
it is your responsibility to include the names of your group members.

Do bear in mind pair programming is a central part of the
undergraduate curriculum here. Pair programming is not intended to
divide-and-conquer, but instead for students to collaboratively solve
problems together. You are only twice as fast working separately if
the typing is by and away the hardest part of programming. Which it is
not.

Whatever size group you work in you should still plan to [all work
synchronously and simultaneously
together](https://www.remotemobprogramming.org/). Note a larger group
is not necessarily better. You should at least try to do some of this
wholly on your own. It's good to have a baseline early on to know [if
you have this material under your belt or if you are getting
lost](https://martinfowler.com/articles/on-pair-programming.html#couldIReallyDoThisByMyself). Ultimately,
you should be responsible for and have a firm understanding of all
work submitted under your name. You should be able to demonstrate this
mastery when we request.

#### Group Dynamics and Difficulties

If you find that your group is no longer able to work effectively
together or that not everyone can equally participate, please bring
this to your lab instructor's attention. Your lab instructor may have
suggestions about how to improve your group cohesion, or may use the
staff privilege to reallocate group members. 

## Academic Accommodations 

If you have accommodations from the [Disability Resource Center
(DRC)](http://www.northeastern.edu/drc/) please submit your Professor
Notification Letter to me by email, preferably within the first two
weeks of the quarter, so I can do my part to help you achieve equal
access in this course. I am eager to discuss ways we can ensure your
full participation.

I encourage all students who may benefit from learning more about DRC
services to [contact the
DRC](http://www.northeastern.edu/drc/#fp-blog-entry:~:text=Contact%20Information).

## Health and Safety

The university has put into place a robust plan to make the campus
healthy and safe for all — but you must do your part. On August 22, all
students received an
[email](https://news.northeastern.edu/coronavirus/university-messages/university-response-to-unsafe-behavior/)
from Senior Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs Madeleine Estabrook on
the expectations for behavior both on campus and off campus. **Please
read it carefully today.**

To summarize:

* Gatherings on or off campus must conform to healthy practices as
  outlined by university and [Massachusetts state
  guidance](https://www.mass.gov/doc/revised-gatherings-order-august-7-2021).
  If you host or attend an inappropriate party or gathering, you run the
  very real risk of immediate removal from the community.

* Wear a mask indoors and outdoors as you maintain a 6-foot distance
  from everyone.

* Get tested every three days using the COVID-19 Test Scheduler
  ([covid19-testing.northeastern.edu](https://northeastern.sharepoint.com/sites/covidscheduler).)
  We may require more frequent testing as the semester progresses. It’s
  quick, easy and will help us to quickly identify and care for anyone
  who tests positive. I will not be told the identity of anyone who
  tests positive, and you do not need to share that information with me
  or anyone else unless you want to. If you receive a positive test
  result, you will be contacted by a member of the university’s
  telehealth team who will provide you with next steps.

* Do a Daily Wellness Check
  ([wellness-check.northeastern.edu](https://wellness-check.northeastern.edu)),
  wash your hands well and regularly, and disinfect high-touch surfaces
  and spaces.

* I will be wearing a [face
  covering](https://news.northeastern.edu/coronavirus/reopening/frequently-asked-questions/#reopening)
  or mask as I teach and expect that you will do the same in class. If
  you come to class without a mask, I’ll ask you to go and [get one on
  campus](https://news.northeastern.edu/coronavirus/reopening/policies-and-protocols/#face-covering-protocol).
  You can get a mask at the Visitor Center or at the Curry Student
  Center Help Desk. If you refuse to wear a mask in class, I won’t be
  able to continue the class. If you are not sitting six feet apart from
  your classmate, I’ll ask you to do so. We won’t be able to eat or
  drink in class (except water). If you test positive, you will need to
  enter isolation as directed by the university’s telehealth team. I
  expect that you will not come in-person to class and that you will
  follow the guidance from the university telehealth team to isolate and
  get appropriate healthcare if needed.

* Staying safe is a responsibility that we all must take seriously.
  Keep in mind the “Protect the Pack” theme. Remember that our
  individual actions will help everyone stay safe this fall."

## Equity and Compliance

One of our responsibilities in supporting student learning 360° is to
help create a safe learning environment both in person and
virtually. You should carefully consult the university's [relevant
policies](https://www.northeastern.edu/ouec/title-ix-policy-2/), and
if you have or experience any violations of the above I encourage you
to take full advantage of the [university
resources](https://www.northeastern.edu/ouec/resources/main-campus-resources/).

It is also important that you know that federal regulations and
University policy require me to promptly convey any information about
certain kinds of misconduct known to me to our Deputy Title IX
Coordinator or IU’s Title IX Coordinator. In that event, they will
work with a small number of others on campus to ensure that
appropriate measures are taken and resources are made available to the
student who may have been harmed. Protecting a student’s privacy is of
utmost concern, and all involved will only share information with
those that need to know to ensure the University can respond and
assist. 

## Acknowledgments 

![In the syllabus]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/syllabus.gif "Might just be worth checking.")


