---
title: But will you accept my late work in /this/ instance? 
---

It is highly unlikely. All policies come with some exceptions, and we
are in exceptional times. But absent some extraordinary case, no, we
shall not.

The only way a course like this is manageable is to adhere rigorously
to syllabus and grading criteria. I can't treat you differently than I
would someone else who's story I found less plausible but with similar
evidence, and call that equitable.

I've--we've--likely already told folk no for work that was less late
than this, and also for work significantly later than this. In almost
all circumstances completely believable. This is likely one of
them. Students---people---are generally trustworthy. Unfortunately,
that's not the sum total of the issue. I can't, without being rightly
open to charges of favoritism, administer things on an as-believed
basis. I don't know any straightforward way to objectively apply
criteria for this.

If you think this is unfair, know I consider the only thing worse than
unfair policy is unfair policy unfairly applied. 

We allow unlimited submissions, so you have chances to iteratively
improve things, and always make sure you have a submission in.

Do recall that [our much-touted approach for this has been to allow
the easy, free, no questions asked drop one and a half assignments]({{
site.baseurl }}/syllabus/#homework). I know this isn't the way you'd
hoped to use one---IMO any time you have to use one, it's something
sub-optimal going on---but do rest assured a simple mistake in and of
itself shouldn't affect your grade.

We are also more than happy to go over your solutions with you in
office hours, and would be happy to give you 1:1 feedback on your
work.

